# Version: R1.1
<p style="font-size: 1.1em">Release date: XXXX</p>

## Resolved Known Issues

<div id="resolved-known-issues" class="table-banner" onclick="toggleCollapse(this)">
  <span class="emoji"><i class="fa fa-check"></i><i class="fa fa-screwdriver-wrench"></i></span>
  <span class="text-with-link">
  <span class="text"><i>Click to Expand</i></span>
  <a class="anchor-link" href="#resolved-known-issues" title="Copy link">
  <i class="fa-solid fa-link"></i>
  </a>
  </span>
  <span class="arrow">▸</span>
</div>
<div class="collapsible-content">
<h2 id="basic-demographics">Basic Demographics</h2>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Income Not Displayed For All Participants</strong><br>
In rare cases, the <code>Income</code> field in Basic Demographics (<code>sed_basic_demographics</code>) may not be displayed for certain participants. This issue results from errors in transferring data from the REDCap Demographics form (<code>sed_bm_demo</code>) into the Basic Demographics. For complete income information, please reference the original source field in <code>sed_bm_demo</code>.</p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Duplicate Options for &#39;Mother Race&#39; Variable</strong><br>
The variable &#39;Mother Race&#39; (<code>sed_basic_demographics_screen_mother_race</code>) has duplicate options for the selection of &#39;Black African American&#39; (option #3). This option is not used for data entry, and instead the &#39;Black_or African American&#39; option (option #5) should be used. No other variables are affected by this.     </p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Gestational Age at Delivery and Mother’s Age at Delivery</strong><br>
Gestational Age at Delivery (<code>sed_basic_demographics_gestational_age_delivery</code>) and Mother&#39;s Age at Delivery (<code>sed_basic_demographics_mother_age_delivery</code>) are variables that should only be available for participants who have V01 + V02 or V03 in the data release which had a cutoff of visit completion of July 1, 2024. However, for these measures data for deliveries after July 1, 2024 were included in the release in error. These fields which represent births beyond our cutoff dates were incorrectly made available, did not undergo QC, and will be removed in the patch release. Users can currently filter or remove any values for participants that do not have a V01 + V02 or V03 until the fix.           </p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Mother Ethnicity</strong><br>
The variable <code>screen_mother_ethnicity</code> should be a 2-level variable, however it is currently noted as a 4-level variable in the data dictionary. Levels of 0 and 1 (in the data dictionary) are included in error, they do not appear in the dataset; all participants with valid data have a value of 2 (Hispanic) or 3 (non-Hispanic).</p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Mother Race and Ethnicity</strong><br>
For the variable <code>rc_mother_ethnoracial_aou_race_ethnicity</code>, the “None of these fully describe me/Other” response option is not currently a separate category for this variable and will be added.      </p>
<h2 id="biospecimens">Biospecimens</h2>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Nails &amp; Urine: Collection &amp; Analysis Dates Currently Missing</strong><br>
Collection dates and analysis dates for Nails and Urine are not provided in the current release and will be provided in the future.</p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Urine: Incorrect Specific Gravity Variable</strong><br>
Urine concentrations vary by participant and concentration corrections can be made by creatine or specific gravity. However, the urine specific gravity variable is incorrect (<code>bio_bm_biosample_urine_bio_spg_u</code>) (there are several participants with “1” when the variable should be expressed in the thousands) and should therefore not be analyzed. Only the initial creatinine results from sample validation should be used for urinary concentration corrections.          </p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Urine: Toxicology (Cotinine)</strong><br>
There may be negative values for urinary toxicology results (e.g. <code>bio_bm_biosample_urine_bio_bm_biosample_urine_bio_c_cot_u</code>). Please note that negative values for these variables are not biologically plausible. We recommend users convert these values to 0 prior to analyzing their data.            </p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Urine: Negative Gestational Ages</strong><br>
There are two participants with negative gestational ages in the urine biosample dataset due to inaccurate collection dates of the biosample. Please do not include these two observations in your analysis.   </p>
<h2 id="eeg">EEG</h2>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>HBCD-MADE Resting-State Derivatives</strong><br>
The HBCD-MADE summary statistics for resting-state EEG data contained in the derivative file <code>processed_data/*_task-RS_powerSummaryStats.csv</code> are incorrect due to a former bug in the pipeline and should not be used for analysis. Users should instead generate these files themselves using scripts provided via <a href="https://hbcd-eeg-utilities.readthedocs.io/en/stable/">HBCD EEG Utilities</a> for extracting summary statistics.    </p>
<h2 id="neurocognition-language">Neurocognition &amp; Language</h2>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>SPM-2 T-Scores</strong><br>
The t-scores are currently not provided, as the original conversion from raw score to t-score was incorrect. The t-scores will be corrected and provided in a future data release.  </p>
<h2 id="pregnancy-exposure-including-substance-use">Pregnancy &amp; Exposure, Including Substance Use</h2>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Infant Health Check</strong><br>
The fields <code>pex_bm_healthv2_inf_00&lt;1|2|3|4|5&gt;__00</code> are &#39;Descriptive&#39; fields that were erroneously included and can be safely ignored.        </p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>APA 1/2</strong><br>
Individual items for Level 1 and Level 2 domains are provided, but any summary scores and corresponding T-scores (where appropriate) are not provided for any Level 2 domains. This will be corrected in a future release. In the meantime, users can calculate their own summary scores and convert them to T-scores as appropriate based on the scoring procedures provided in the user documentation. Please note for Mania, the Level 2 individual items are currently coded on a scale of 1 to 5 and will need to be recoded as 0 to 4 prior to summary score calculation.</p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS)</strong><br>
Users should be aware that each item for the EPDS is duplicated (for example, <code>epds_001</code> and <code>epds_001_01</code>); these duplicate columns contain the same data. Duplicate data will be removed in the future.       </p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>TLFB Substance Use Flags</strong><br>
The TLFB Substance Use Flags are intended to indicate whether a participant had <strong>ever met the substance-specific use criteria</strong> during or after pregnancy across visits V01 and V02 at the time of survey administration. Currently, <strong>only the alcohol use flag</strong> correctly follows this logic. All other substance use flags are incorrect and will be corrected in a future release. In the meantime, use the R code provided <a href="https://github.com/nbdc-datahub/hbcd-tlfb-su-flags">here</a> to derive your own substance use flag variables.         </p>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>TLFB Incorrect Age Variables</strong><br>
The following age variables are incorrect: <code>pex_ch_tlfb_adjusted_age</code>, <code>pex_ch_tlfb_gestational_age</code>, and <code>pex_ch_tlfb_candidate_age</code>. Please do not use these age variables in your analyses until they are corrected.   </p>
<h2 id="visit-information">Visit Information</h2>
<p><span class="emoji" style="color: #9d4edd;"><i class="fas fa-bug"></i></span> <strong>Missing Substance Use Flags</strong><br>
The substance use flags found in the Visit Information data are single summary variables to reflect substance use status (yes/no) based on any positive reports from the (1) Timeline Follow Back (self-report), (2) Healthy History (V02) (self-report), or (3) USDTL urine toxicology results. Nail toxicology results were not used in the creation of these substance use flags. Further, the substance use flag variable is missing for alcohol, opioid, cannabis, and nicotine, and will be integrated in future data releases. In the meantime, users can generate their own substance use flag summary variables using the individual components found in the “pregnancy exposures, including substances” and “biospecimens” domains.       </p>
</div>

## Counts
* **Total number of participants queried from DB:** 
* Total number of visits:  
    * All: 
    * V01: 
    * V02: 
    * V03: 
* By Sex:
  * Female: 
  * Male: 
